

2009 Article – The National Academies of Sciences
The New Orleans Hurricane Protection System
Accessing Pre Katrina Vulnerability and Improving 
Mitigation and Preparedness.
The New Orleans Hurricane Protection System Evacuation efforts in the days before Katrina successfully evacuated tens of thousands of residents, but these efforts were inadequate to move all of the city’s residents to safety. Property damages were extensive and widespread; in many areas, the destruction from Katrina is still apparent today. In the wake of Katrina, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers established the Interagency Performance Evaluation Task Force (IPET) to address fundamental questions about the performance of the New Orleans hurricane protection system during Hurricane Katrina and to assess the risks posed to the New Orleans region by future tropical storms. The Army Corps of Engineers requested Assessing pre-Katrina Vulnerability and Improving Mitigation and Preparedness.

Large areas of the New Orleans metropolitan region are located at or below sea level and are surrounded by bodies of water—the Mississippi River, Lake Pontchartrain, and Lake Borgne— that rise and can overflow during hurricanes and floods. The region’s proximity to the large, shallow continental shelf of the northern Gulf of Mexico makes it even more vulnerable to hurricane storm surge, which is a mass of water pushed shoreward by hurricane winds. These vulnerabilities were made painfully clear during Hurricane Katrina. During and immediately after the hurricane’s landfall, homes and buildings throughout New Orleans and surrounding areas were inundated with storm surge and floodwaters; more than one thousand lives were lost in the event. Although there were hundreds of miles of levees and floodwalls and an extensive pumping system in place when Katrina struck, the storm exposed many weaknesses in this infrastructure. Large sections of the network of levees and floodwalls were overtopped and eroded; levee breaches at four sites across the city further allowed waters to penetrate and overwhelm much of the city. The New Orleans Hurricane Protection System Evacuation efforts in the days before Katrina successfully evacuated tens of thousands of residents, but these efforts were inadequate to move all of the city’s residents to safety. Property damages were extensive and widespread; in many areas, the destruction from Katrina is still apparent today. In the wake of Katrina, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers established the Interagency Performance Evaluation Task Force (IPET) to address fundamental questions about the performance of the New Orleans hurricane protection system during Hurricane Katrina and to assess the risks posed to the New Orleans region by future tropical storms. The Army Corps of Engineers requested that the National Academy of Engineering and the National Research Council convene a committee of experts to examine a series of draft reports released by the IPET. This, the committee’s fifth and final report, reviews the final IPET assessment and identifies key lessons from 

the Katrina experience that can inform future efforts to enhance hurricane mitigation and
preparedness. 


