 
Article 4 - University of Tulane 2018
 Historical New Orleans
Levee Breaches during Katrina
Curated by Levees.org, New Orleans Public Library, Louisiana State Museum, and the University of New Orleans History Department
Both residents and visitors to New Orleans still have the desire to see where the levees failed during Katrina in August 2005. This tour allows one to virtually "visit" three major breach sites and their associated neighborhoods. The sites include the Southeast breach of the Industrial Canal, which flooded the Lower Ninth Ward, the East breach of the London Avenue Canal, which flooded Gentilly, and the 17th Street Canal breach, which flooded Lakeview.
Lower Ninth Ward Levee Breaches in 2005
Pre-Katrina, the area immediately in front of the east breaches of the Inner Harbor Navigation Canal (a.k.a. the Industrial Canal) was a dense, thriving neighborhood of primarily African American lower- to middle-class homeowners. Houses in this neighborhood, called the Lower Ninth Ward, were built right up to the canal walls and were shaded by huge oaks, cypresses, and pecans.
On August 29, 2005, at about 5 a.m., a section of the I-wall south of the Florida Avenue bridge began to breach. At this time, the water level was still below the top of the floodwalls. This first breach occurred not far from a Sewerage and Water Board drainage pump station (PS#5). Station operators elsewhere in the city listened to the PS#5 operators describe the problem and beg for help. More than one post-Katrina study determined this particular failure was due to water seeping beneath the canal walls which caused the wall to move and fail.
At about 7:45 a.m., a second breach occurred about six blocks to the south and eventually widened into a 1,000 foot gap. Floodwaters from the two breaches combined to submerge the city’s entire Lower Ninth Ward, killing hundreds (directly and indirectly) and destroying commercial buildings, homes and infrastructure. Eighty-four bodies were recovered from areas directly flooded by the breach this breach of the Industrial Canal.
The water from the two east breaches also flowed into the cities of Arabi and Chalmette in adjacent St. Bernard Parish. Floodwaters from two breaches on the western side of the Industrial Canal combined with floodwaters released from the 17th Street and London Avenue Canals to flood most of the City’s main basin.
Before the storm, an empty barge owned by Ingram Marine had been moored across from the area that would become one of the breach sites. At some point, it came loose, and after Katrina’s winds and the eye had passed into Mississippi, the barge was pushed across the Industrial Canal. It then floated through the southeast breach and was deposited in the Lower Ninth Ward.
Post-Katrina studies concluded that the southeast I-wall and the northwest I-wall were overtopped by floodwaters. Failures occurred when the water level was estimated to be 1.7 feet above the tops of the floodwalls and levees.
Studies also determined that earthen levees without I-walls all around the city, including the southwest breach, were overtopped by a storm surge. Out of the 50 estimated levee breaches system-wide, the majority can be attributed to overtopping and erosion. In other words, the water scoured away soil from the land-side and washed it away, causing the I-wall to fail.
Today, the adjacent land is largely vacant of homes and buildings. Many foundations or slabs where homes once stood are all that remain. All trees have been removed either due to the initial flooding or due to removal by governmental agencies post-Katrina.
2
Inner Harbor Navigation Canal (Industrial Canal) and the Lower Ninth Ward
Now known as the historic Lower Ninth Ward, this area orginated as a cypress swamp featuring many bayous. In this rural setting, residents enjoyed ready access to fishing grounds and grew okra and other vegetables. In the mid- 1800’s, working-class African Americans and immigrant laborers from Ireland, Germany, and Italy seeking affordable housing migrated to the area. The Ninth Ward grew into a unique neighborhood with intergenerational and familial relationships across decades.
In 1923, the 5.5 mile long Industrial Canal (Inner Harbor Navigation Canal) opened, connecting Lake Pontchartrain to the Mississippi River. Equipped with a massive lock, the canal allows large cargo ships and barges access to river wharves. The canal is 30 feet deep and 300 feet wide at its lake end and about 150 feet at its lock end.
The Industrial Canal separates eastern New Orleans from the rest of the city and the Lower 9th Ward neighborhood from the Upper 9th Ward. Approximately half of the waterway’s length, from the Industrial Lock on the Mississippi River to a point north of the Florida Avenue Bridge, is confluent with the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway (GIWW).
Brisk industrial development along the canal in the 1930s created considerable employment due to wharves alongside both banks and dry docks north of the GIWW. These employment opportunities were in addition to employment on wharves along the Mississippi River. During the same decade, the city installed numerous components of an improved drainage system. Better drainage combined with good employment caused many people to settle in the Lower Ninth Ward.
In the late 1950s, a bridge connecting the City and the Lower Ninth Ward, the Judge William Seeber Bridge (a.k.a. the Claiborne Avenue Bridge) was built across the canal at Claiborne Avenue. This spurred retail and commercial development throughout the neighborhood.
In September 1965, Hurricane Betsy pushed storm surge into the Industrial Canal and the east side canal wall breached in the same general area where it would breach again 40 years later during Hurricane Katrina. Eighty percent of the Lower Ninth Ward area went under water and hundreds of people lost their lives; the city reported an official count of eighty–one deaths.
The following year, Congress passed the Demonstration Cities and Metropolitan Development Act. Through the Act, employment in the Lower Ninth Ward increased and neighborhood revitalization occurred as new agencies were established. Until its devastation in 2005, the Lower Ninth Ward retained its heterogeneous population, including socio-economically disadvantaged and middle class residents, predominately African Americans.
3
London Avenue Canal Levee Breach in 2005
n 1965, Hurricane Betsy demonstrated that a major hurricane could overtop the earthen levees of the London Avenue Canal. So the Army Corps of Engineers recommended two plans -- raising the height of the canal walls using concrete-capped steel sheet pilings (I-walls) or installing floodgates at the canal’s mouth at the lakefront. The Corps felt both alternatives provided equally sufficient storm surge protection.
Since raising the heights of the walls was three times more expensive than the floodgates plan, the Corps recommended the latter. The Corps believed it was following its congressional mandate. Unlike the ones built post-Katrina, these original gates did not include auxiliary pumps.
Meanwhile, the Orleans Levee Board (OLB) and the Sewerage and Water Board (S&WB) legitimately feared that the cheaper gates-only plan was incompatible with their interior drainage responsibilities. So, in 1991, in full transparency, the OLB, backed by the New Orleans City Council, the S&WB, and neighboring communities, asked the state congressional delegation for authorization for the much more expensive higher flood walls plan. They succeeded, and the corps installed the new I-walls.
Before the 2005 flood, the adjacent area to the breach site was a thriving mixed neighborhood of white and African American homeowners. Homes were shaded by oak, cypress and pecan trees.
On August 29, 2005, at about 9:30 a.m, two monoliths (30-foot long sections of concrete floodwall) failed, sending torrents of water and sand into New Orleans’s Gentilly neighborhood. The location was the 4900 block of Warrington Drive. At failure, the water level in the canal was about 5 feet lower than the top of the wall. Storm surge water poured through the gap, killing hundreds (directly and indirectly), destroying hundreds of residences, and causing millions of dollars in property damage.
Today, the adjacent land is largely vacant of homes, buildings and trees. Many foundations or slabs where homes once stood are all that remain. The repaired breach site now consists of a different sturdier design called a T-wall. Three times more expensive to build, the new wall is easily differentiated because of its different texture and color.
Post-disaster studies concluded that the breach occurred due to steel sheet pilings driven to depths that were too shallow. Sadly, in recommending the I-walls with such short sheet pilings, the Corps had relied upon a poorly executed and misinterpreted study it had conducted near Morgan City in 1988. At a savings of $100,000,000, the Corps wrongly concluded it could “short-sheet” the steel pilings of the 17th Street Canal driving them to depths of not more than 17 feet instead of between 31 and 46.
In January 2008, Federal Judge Stanwood Duval, of the US District Court for Eastern Louisiana, held the US Army Corps of Engineers responsible for defects in the design of the concrete floodwalls constructed in the levees of the London Avenue Canal; however, the agency could not be held financially liable due to sovereign immunity provided in the Flood Control Act of 1928.
 
 
17th Street Canal Levee Breach in 2005
In 1965, Hurricane Betsy demonstrated that a major hurricane could overtop the earthen levees of the 17th Street Canal. So the Army Corps of Engineers recommended two cost-effective plans which were 1) raising the height of the canal walls or 2) installing floodgates at the canal’s mouth at the lakefront. The Corps felt both could provide reliable hurricane surge protection.
Since the cost for both approaches was about the same, the Corps ultimately elected to raise the canal walls using I-walls (concrete capped steel sheet pilings). The Corps did this partly because the local sponsors (Orleans Levee Board and the Sewage and Water Board) preferred it. The OLB and SWB viewed the floodgates plan as incompatible with their interior drainage responsibilities. (Note the gates plan did not include auxiliary pumps like those in place today.)
On August 29, 2005 at about 9:45 a.m, a monolith (30-foot long section of the concrete floodwall) failed sending torrents of water into New Orleans’s Lakeview neighborhood. The water level in the Canal at the time of failure was about 5 feet lower than the top of the wall. The breach quickly expanded into a 450 foot wide gap through which storm surge water poured, killing hundreds (directly and indirectly), destroying 
hundreds of residences, and causing millions of dollars in property damage. Thirty-one (31) bodies were recovered from areas directly flooded.
Today, the adjacent land is vacant of homes, buildings and trees. Many foundations or slabs where homes once stood are all that remain. The repaired breach site now consists of a different sturdier design called a T-wall. Three times more expensive to build, the new wall is easily differentiated because of its different texture and different color. It is also two feet thicker.
Post-disaster studies conclude that the breach was due to steel sheet pilings driven to depths that were too shallow. Sadly, in recommending the I-walls with such short sheet pilings, the Corps had relied upon a poorly executed and misinterpreted study it had conducted near Morgan City in 1988. At a savings of $100,000,000, the Corps wrongly concluded it could short-sheet the steel pilings of the 17th Street Canal driving them to depths of not more than 17 feet instead of between 31 and 46.
In January of 2008, Federal Judge Stanwood Duval, of the US District Court for Eastern Louisiana, held the US Army Corps of Engineers responsible for defects in the design of the concrete floodwalls constructed in the levees of the 17th Street Canal; however, the agency could not be held financially liable due to sovereign immunity provided in the Flood Control Act of 1928
